---
permalink: /porneia/
layout: layout
title: Porneia
---

<div class="center">

   <h1>Porneia</h1>
   
   <a href="https://github.com/StevenTammen/chrya/edit/master/studies/porneia.md" target="_blank">
     <img src="https://chrya.com/assets/images/GitHub.png" height="30" width="30">
   </a> &nbsp; &nbsp;
   
   <a href="http://prose.io/#StevenTammen/chrya/edit/master/studies/porneia.md" target="_blank">
     <img src="https://chrya.com/assets/images/Prose.png" height="30" width="30">
   </a>
   
</div>

## Table of Contents

- [Purity of Thought](#purity-of-thought)
- [Practical Matters](#practical-matters)
  * [Removing Sources of Temptation](#removing-sources-of-temptation)
  * [Resisting to the Point of Blood](#resisting-to-the-point-of-blood)
  * [Overcoming Feelings of Guilt and Shame](#overcoming-feelings-of-guilt-and-shame)
- [Regarding Teaching On This Subject](#regarding-teaching-on-this-subject)

## Purity of Thought

There is a rightful taboo surrounding *porneia* (Greek: πορνεία, sexual
immorality) in Christian circles. Certain parties claim that by "not
talking about it" we are making the problem worse. I submit that this is
foolishness.

One need not elaborate about what manner of things are included in
*porneia* to help people follow the good path. Is there any doubt about
the propriety of some act? Then let the wise man flee from it without
looking back. Ephesians 5:3 makes it clear that this is not some game of
seeing how long one can handle fire without getting burned.

It is for this reason that victory in this area requires a pattern of
thought wherein *porneia* has no place. You do not conquer sexual sin by
keeping track of your progress, trying to motivate yourself by
statistics of success and failure, nor through fiddly filtering
software, accountability partners, journaling, or anything else. All of
these things make you think about "it", whatever "it" may be. This is
madness -- like an alcoholic gurgling with vodka or someone who has quit
smoking lighting a cigarette but "not inhaling."

I liken it to what one experiences when someone comes up and says "do
not think about pink elephants" (or what have you). Invariably, one
begins to think about pink elephants. It's simply unavoidable. (This
phenomenon is described by something called [Ironic Process
Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ironic_process_theory)). Because
of how our brains work, any time we consciously try *not* to think about
something, neural pathways related to the something -- be they visual,
auditory, or even emotional -- will be called to mind. Put differently,
not thinking about something, paradoxically, is a way of thinking about
it.

What all this has to do with the matter at hand is this -- anything that
involves actual thought concerning *porneia* is playing with fire -- but
so too is anything that calls *porneia* to mind to make you "not think
about it." One needs no physical objects to sin in this area (e.g.,
while one needs alcohol to become drunk, one may lust after a woman
without anyone else even about). This makes a zero-tolerance policy all
the more important -- the line between having *porneia* in mind (in
whatever way) and falling into sin is not one that may be reasonably
parsed. Therefore, the only possible path to success is resolving never
to even let the topic cross your mind -- and if thoughts intrude, to
push them right back out.

## Practical Matters

### Removing Sources of Temptation

It is prudent to remove unnecessary temptation, as long as doing so does
not force one to constantly think about it. For this reason, I recommend
an "always on" *passive* internet filter (rather than something which
requires timers or intentional "blocking" periods, etc.). I use [K9 Web
Protection](http://www1.k9webprotection.com/) for this purpose. Think of
this in the same terms as an alcoholic refusing to keep hard liquor in
his house -- it's not legalism, simply common sense.

Within day to day life, I would also recommend that you take care what
sort of situations you find yourself in. Some places have much higher
concentrations of temptations in this area than others (beaches and bars
for example). Minimizing exposure to all tempting things is prudent, as
long as one does not get legalistic about it.

### Resisting to the Point of Blood

You will never get past this issue (much less any of the other difficult
areas of sin in the Christian life) without accepting responsibility for
your actions and building a steely resolve -- until you "resist to the
point of shedding blood" (Hebrews 12:4). We overcome by the Spirit --
but we must choose to let the Spirit control us. Failing to accept
responsibility for our part in the matter -- striving constantly to be
under the control of the Spirit -- accounts in large part for the
whining attitude that has taken over the Church with respect to this
topic. Just like many of the Israelites complained to God as he led them
through the wilderness, not seeing how he had already delivered them and
was leading them to peace and proseperity, so too many people in the
Church complain of a culture awash with sexuality and an internet full
of temptation. All the Israelites had to do was trust God -- nothing is
different for us.

### Overcoming Feelings of Guilt and Shame

It is important not to be overcome by guilt; sitting around "feeling
bad" about sinning (perhaps leading to more sin) is not at all what God
wants for us. God will always "punish us enough" -- we will be
disciplined as sons if we truly are of Him. We needn't act out some form
of our own penance for the sin to be forgiven -- any thought that comes
close to this is in fact blasphemous. Not being blameless and holy, we
are not even worthy of atoning for our sin, and we would not be able to
withstand a single instant of the fiery judgement Jesus faced to pay for
our transgressions.

So how can we avoid counterproductive feelings of guilt and self-imposed
alienation from God after sinning? By forgetting what is behind and
straining toward what is ahead (Philippians 3:13). 1 John 1:9 says that
if we confess our sins, we *are* forgiven. Confessing our sins restores
our fellowship with God, turning any divine discipline into suffering
for blessing. If you think about it, refusing to accept the clear
teaching of 1 John 1:9 betrays a lack of faith in the efficacy of Jesus'
sacrifice on our behalf; by refusing to believe that we really are
forgiven, we throw God's gracious offer back in His face, saying,
effectively, "I'm too bad a sinner for your grace; Jesus' sacrifice was
in vain." That's certainly not something we should be thinking as
Christians.

## Regarding Teaching On This Subject

One might fairly point out that *porneia* comes up in the Bible (and
I've just spent several paragraphs talking about it). So, by my own
words, am I not leading people into sin? Heaven forbid!

This is a subtle straw man argument that fails to account for what I
would call "thought context." Teaching on *porneia* requires thinking
about it to some extent -- true. But this thought occurs in the context
of Bible reading and Bible teaching, two activities wherein the believer
ought to be closely under the guidance of the Spirit, making sin much
less likely. It is also worth pointing out that both my treatment above
and scripture deal in generalities without ever getting specific (cf. 1
Corinthians 6:18 and 1 Thessalonians 4:3-8) -- unlike many "systems"
people use to try and combat this area of sin. Neural connections
associated with the the abstract concept of *porneia* are less likely to
lead one into sin than neural connections associated with "specifics"
(of whatever form).

This being said, fixating on all this when reading one's Bible or taking
in teaching is still a bad idea. I can think of very little more that
needs to be said on the matter outside what I have covered above and
scripture's clear warnings on the subject. So it would be prudent to
avoid dwelling on this matter even in reading and teaching contexts, to
the extent one is able.
